JACC: BASIC TO TRANSLATIONAL SCIENCE

VOL. 1, NO. 3, 2016

ª 2016 THE AUTHORS. PUBLISHED BY ELSEVIER ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN
COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION. THIS IS AN OPEN ACCESS ARTICLE UNDER

ISSN 2452-302X
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jacbts.2016.03.002

THE CC BY-NC-ND LICENSE (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

TRANSLATIONAL TOOLBOX

Drugs, Devices, and the FDA: Part 1
An Overview of Approval Processes for Drugs
Gail A. Van Norman, MD

SUMMARY
Over the last 150 years, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has evolved from a small division of the U.S. Patent
Ofﬁce to 1 of the largest consumer protection agencies in the world. Its mission includes ensuring that new medical
treatments reach the public as quickly as possible while simultaneously ensuring that new treatments are both safe and
effective. In the face of urgent consumer need, the FDA has faced criticism that its processes are too lengthy and costly
and that the time to new drug release is signiﬁcantly longer in the United States than in other Western countries. Calls
from the public to loosen FDA regulations to facilitate more rapid approval of drugs and devices have been countered by
the occurrence of patient harm and deaths after some approved drugs have reached the marketplace. New drug and
device approval in the United States take an average of 12 and 7 years, respectively, from pre-clinical testing to
approval. Costs for development of medical devices run into millions of dollars, and a recent study suggests that the
entire cost for a new drug is in excess of $1 billion. For investigators seeking approval for new drugs and devices, FDA
processes can be formidable. This 2-part series is intended to provide an overview of the steps involved in bringing new
drugs and devices through the FDA process. Part 1 concerns the process of new drug approvals. Part 2 continues with
approval of medical devices. (J Am Coll Cardiol Basic Trans Science 2016;1:170–9) © 2016 The Authors. Published by
Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the
CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

R

egulation of the development, production,

markets for adulterated and mishandled food and

marketing, and sales of medical pharmaceu-

pharmaceuticals. The Federal Food, Drug, and Cos-

ticals and devices entails paradoxical goals.

metics Act of 1938 required all drugs to be approved

It must ensure that new and effective medical treat-

for safety by the FDA (1). This mission was expanded

ments reach the public rapidly while simultaneously

in 1962 by the Kefauver-Harris amendments that

providing protection from ineffective or even unsafe

added the requirement that drugs be proven “effec-

therapies and from predatory marketing practices

tive” as well as safe, and placed strict controls on

that tout unproven remedies to vulnerable patients.

the use of investigational drugs (2). Regulations

In the United States, these regulatory functions fall

regarding drug safety oversight were expanded in

to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).

1976 to include medical devices (1,2).

The FDA is the oldest consumer protection agency

Over the course of the 20th century, the role of

in the United States, originating in the U.S. Patent

the FDA has undergone a signiﬁcant metamorphosis

Ofﬁce in 1848, and later inherited by the Department

due to expanding federal regulations, increasing

of Agriculture in 1862 (1). The modern function of

complexity of drugs and devices, and the growth of the

the agency in oversight of drug and medical device

pharmaceutical industry into a major economic force

marketing was ultimately codiﬁed in the Pure Food

in the United States. Today, the United States has

and Drug Act of 1906 (2,3), which was passed in

among the most stringent regulations regarding

response to a pressing need to curb interstate

medical drug and device development and marketing,

From the Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. Dr. Van Norman has
received ﬁnancial support from the American College of Cardiology.
Manuscript received March 10, 2016; accepted March 10, 2016.

Van Norman

JACC: BASIC TO TRANSLATIONAL SCIENCE VOL. 1, NO. 3, 2016
APRIL 2016:170–9

171

Drugs, Devices, and the FDA

and the FDA has grown from that small division in the

and almost 9 of every 10 new drugs then fails

ABBREVIATIONS

patent ofﬁce to 1 of the largest consumer safety

in the human testing phase. In 1 study, 50%

AND ACRONYMS

agencies in the world. Its core mission remains the

of all drugs reaching the ﬁnal stage (Phase III)

same: to provide consumers with assurance that

of clinical testing did not make it to market

medical drugs and devices that reach the marketplace

(13). The problem is not unique to the United

have proven safety and efﬁcacy in the roles for which

States; a recent analysis concluded in 2011 by

they have been tested and approved. But, this mission

the Centre for Medicine Research in the

FDA = U.S. Food and Drug

has faced criticism and calls from an increasingly

United Kingdom found that in the prior 3

Administration

demanding consumer base to provide more rapid

years Phase II and III clinical trials had

IND = investigational new drug

development, approval, and release of new products.

experienced rising failure rates, with only

NDA = new drug application

Strict regulation may have served the public with

18% of drugs making it out of Phase II to

enhanced assurance of therapeutic safety, but pro-

CDER = Center for Drug
Evaluation and Research

EIND = emergency
investigational new drug

Phase III testing (14,15).

gressive concerns of a so-called “drug lag” have

The pathways for approval of medical devices are

resulted from an increasingly complex regulatory

shorter and generally less costly when compared with

environment and the expense associated with drug

the regulatory process for drugs. Although the drug

development. Delay in the development and market-

development takes on average 12 years from concept

ing of new pharmaceuticals was evidenced by a

to market, the same process for medical devices av-

decline in the number of drugs approved by the FDA

erages 3 to 7 years (16).

from an average of 50 drugs annually in the late 1950s

For researchers involved in the clinical develop-

to approximately 17 per year after 1965 (2,4). It is

ment and testing of putative drugs and devices, the

unclear whether FDA regulations were entirely

process of FDA approval can be daunting and difﬁcult

responsible for the deceleration, because foreign

to navigate. This ﬁrst part of a 2-part series is inten-

countries also experienced a lag (2,5,6), but it was

ded to provide an overview of the steps in bringing a

nevertheless obvious that new drugs and devices

drug through the process of clinical trials and FDA

were often reaching the market in other countries

approval. The second part of this series will discuss

months to years before achieving FDA approval in the

the process of obtaining approval to study devices,

United States (2). Modern regulations allowing for

which have their own unique pathway.

expanded access and accelerated approval for drugs
to treat life-threatening conditions have their origins
in the public outcry over delays in access to acquired
immune deﬁciency syndrome treatments in the 1980s
(7). But, movements to “deregulate” drug development by loosening FDA regulations have been weakened by the occurrence of major safety incidents, such
as with benoxaprofen in 1982 (2). The nonsteroidal
anti-inﬂammatory agent, marketed under the brand
name Oraﬂex, was released to the public but then
withdrawn when patient deaths were reported in the
United Kingdom (8,9). Thus the drug/device development environment in the United States involves a
constant balance between accelerating pressures to
expedite effective therapies to the public, and the
mission to minimize major adverse events (10).
Today, the path from initial demonstration that a

PART 1: FDA APPROVAL OF NEW DRUGS
WHAT IS A DRUG? Not every substance taken by

patients “for their health” is considered a drug by the
FDA (Table 1). The FDA deﬁnes herbal products,
vitamins, and other complementary medical therapies as “dietary supplements” (17). As such, they are
regulated by the Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research (CDER) of the FDA and are subject to
guidelines by the Dietary Supplement Health and
Education Act of 1994 (18), but they are not subject to
the rigorous tests required of substances that are
deﬁned as “drugs.”
Prior to ever reaching a clinical researcher’s hands,
all

new

drug

development

follows

a

common

pathway. Basic research leads to conceptualization of

molecule may have therapeutic potential to the production of an approved drug involves pre-clinical

T A B L E 1 What Is a Drug: the FDA Deﬁnition

testing, complex clinical trials in humans, and post-

A substance recognized by an ofﬁcial pharmacopoeia or formulary

trial regulatory approval by the FDA. For drugs, this

A substance intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation,
treatment, or prevention of disease

process can take 10 to 15 years and cost millions of
dollars (11). A recent analysis suggests that the actual
cost of taking a new drug from concept to market as of
2014 is now above $1.3 billion (12). Approximately 1 in
1,000 potential drugs is graduated to human clinical
trials after pre-clinical testing in the United States,

A substance (other than food) intended to affect the structure or any
function of the body
A substance intended for use as a component of a medicine but not a
device or a component, part, or accessory of a device
FDA ¼ U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

172

Van Norman

JACC: BASIC TO TRANSLATIONAL SCIENCE VOL. 1, NO. 3, 2016
APRIL 2016:170–9

Drugs, Devices, and the FDA

development

and materials for the IND application (22), as well as

involving in vitro and in vivo studies and drug pro-

information and contact numbers for submitting an

totype design (Table 2). When a substance is ready for

EIND application (detailed in the following text).

a

drug,

followed

by

pre-clinical

clinical study, but prior to any testing in human

All IND applications require the investigator to

subjects, the drug developer must involve the FDA.

supply 3 basic categories of information: 1) data

This process begins when the drug’s sponsor (usually

regarding

the drug manufacturer or distributor) ﬁles an inves-

studies and any previous human experience with the

pre-clinical

tigational new drug (IND) application with the

drug (e.g., foreign experience); 2) manufacturing in-

agency. Federal law requires that a drug be the sub-

formation, including the composition, manufacturer,

ject of an approved marketing application for it to be

stability, and controls; and 3) the clinical protocols of

legally shipped across state lines. An approved IND

the

application provides the developer with a technical

proving that they are qualiﬁed to conduct the trial, as

exemption to this federal regulation, so that clinical

well as commitments to obtain informed consent

investigators can distribute a drug to different study

from subjects, obtain institutional review board (IRB)

centers across the United States (19).

approval, and adhere to any regulations regarding

THE IND APPLICATION: 3 BASIC PATHWAYS TO

INDs (23).

APPROVAL. There are 2 categories of INDs (“com-

P a t h w a y 1 : t h e i n v e s t i g a t o r I N D . An investigator

mercial” and “research”) and 3 types of IND applica-

IND is submitted by a physician, sometimes on behalf

study,

animal

information

about

and

the

toxicological

investigators

tions: investigator IND, emergency use investigational

of an institution or “sponsor” such as a pharmaceu-

new drug (EIND), and treatment IND (19).

tical company (Table 3). The investigator will both

All drugs will go through review by a committee, or
“new drug division,” specializing in the class of drug

initiate and conduct the investigation and direct the
dispensing and administration of the drug.

in question on the basis of the anticipated purpose of

The investigator must wait at least 30 days after

the drug. The FDA encourages investigators to seek

submitting an IND application to begin any clinical

early consultation with the appropriate new drug re-

trials. If the FDA does not object within that time,

view division through the Pre-Investigational New

clinical Phase I testing can begin (24). However, the

Drug Application Consultation Program (20) prior to

FDA may respond to the application with suggestions

submitting a formal IND application. Early collabo-

for

the

study

or

with

mandatory

change

re-

ration prior to IND applications can avoid issuance of

quirements. Although “suggestions” are changes that

suggestions, mandatory changes, or clinical holds on

are not required for the IND study to proceed, they

the application and are well worth the time and

should nevertheless be taken very seriously. The FDA

effort. Collaborative conversations can be initiated by

review panel consists of clinicians and researchers

contacting the appropriate review division (20). The

who may have considerable experience with related

review division can provide valuable guidance about

drugs or drugs in a similar class, and such suggestions

information necessary for an IND submission. The
FDA provides speciﬁc names and contact numbers at
the FDA web site, arranged according to therapeutic
class of drug (21).
In addition to the pre-investigational consultation,

T A B L E 3 Summary of Steps and Timeline in the Investigator

IND Application

Step 1

Contact the appropriate division of the FDA and set up a
Pre-IND Consultation Program; check FDA guidance
documents to be sure the new drug does not qualify
for an exemption from IND application (uncommon,
but can occur with some generic drugs and radiological
products)

Step 2

Submit the application (original and 2 copies) to:
Food and Drug Administration

the FDA provides a number of guidance documents
that can be useful in assembling the necessary data
T A B L E 2 Pre-Clinical Steps in New Drug Development

Understand the disease process

Center for Drug Evaluation and Research

Identify potential targets for pharmaceutical action

Central Document Room

Identify chemicals that modify the targets

5901-B Ammendale Road

Conduct pre-clinical studies: in vivo and in vitro studies to determine
the efﬁcacy and safety of proposed drugs in animal models,
including carcinogenicity, mutagenicity, and teratogenicity

Beltsville, Maryland 20705-1266
Step 3

If the FDA does not raise an objection within 30 days of
submission of the application, the investigator may
proceed

Step 4

Begin initial work to determine pharmaceutical formulation and
outline potential manufacturing processes

If the FDA issues a “clinical hold,” or responds with
suggestions or mandatory changes, address these
issues and resubmit the application

Evaluate the formulated drug’s purity and stability through the
manufacturing process

FDA ¼ U.S. Food and Drug Administration; IND ¼ investigational new drug.

On the basis of results from pre-clinical studies, begin to design
proposed clinical trials in humans to study safety and efﬁcacy

Van Norman

JACC: BASIC TO TRANSLATIONAL SCIENCE VOL. 1, NO. 3, 2016
APRIL 2016:170–9

Drugs, Devices, and the FDA

are not made lightly. Furthermore, it is vital for the

approval. These are also called “expanded use INDs”

approval process that the investigator maintains a

(27). Treatment IND regulations went into effect in

collaborative relationship with the FDA reviewers to

1987, largely as a response to public activism sur-

avoid issues further down the road. Mandatory

rounding the limited availability of azidothymidine

changes are just that: failure to make the required

during the drug’s development (7). Additional accel-

changes will result in FDA issuance of a “clinical

erated approval measures were instituted by The

hold” (24), preventing the study from legally pro-

Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act of

ceeding until the FDA is assured of the safety of the

1997 (28), which allows the FDA to “fast track” certain

study. Although the FDA must respond within 30

products that meet 2 criteria: 1) the product must

days to challenges of a clinical hold by the investi-

concern a life-threatening or serious condition; and 2)

gator, technically there is no deadline for resolution

it must have the potential to address an unmet

of issues causing clinical holds. Typically, a clinical

medical need (29). Four requirements must be met

hold will result in a study delay of a year or more (25).

before issuance of a treatment IND: 1) the drug is

P a t h w a y 2 : t h e E I N D . An EIND asks the FDA to

intended for treatment of a serious or immediately

approve use of an experimental drug in an emergency

life-threatening disease; 2) there is no satisfactory

situation that does not allow time for a standard IND

alternative treatment; 3) the drug is already under

process or IRB approval (26). This type of application

investigation or trials are complete; and 4) the drug

may also be submitted to authorize use in a patient or

sponsor is actively pursuing approval. Prospective

patients who do not meet study criteria or if no

IRB review and informed consent are mandatory. The

approved study protocol exists. EINDs are initiated by

process and timelines for treatment IND applications

direct contact with the appropriate division of the

follow a similar pathway to those of regular INDs, but

FDA. Special contact numbers for EIND applications,

requirements for clinical evidence differ.

including an emergency contact number for night and

THE CLINICAL TRIALS. Clinical trials establish the

weekend contacts, are listed in Table 4. This contact

safety, efﬁcacy, and effectiveness (Table 6) of new

information is current as of March 4, 2016, but may be

drugs and are divided into Phase 0, I, II, and III trials.

updated and can be found at the FDA web site (26). In

Post-approval surveillance trials are generally termed

emergency cases, the FDA will often authorize use of

Phase IV trials. Characteristics of the different clinical

the agent in advance of a full IND, which must then be

trials phases can be found in Table 7, and major steps

completed in a timely fashion. The process and

in the clinical trials phase and IND review are sum-

timeline for EIND applications are summarized in

marized in Table 8. The FDA encourages investigators

Table 5.

and sponsors to communicate directly with the

P a t h w a y 3 : t h e t r e a t m e n t I N D . Treatment IND

appropriate FDA review section during each phase of

applications ask for approval to use an experimental

testing.

drug that is showing promise in clinical studies before

P h a s e 0 c l i n i c a l t r i a l s . Only about 10% of IND ap-

completion of the studies, FDA review, and ﬁnal

plications ever result in clinically approved drugs

T A B L E 4 FDA Contact Numbers and Resources for Emergency IND (or Individual Patient IND) Application*

Purpose

Resource

FDA URL for phone and fax numbers for speciﬁc drug
review divisions

http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/
HowDrugsareDevelopedandApproved/ApprovalApplications/
InvestigationalNewDrugINDApplication/ucm107434.htm

General info for emergency INDs during normal business
hours (8:00 AM to 4:30 PM EST)

Contact CDER’s DDI:
Phone: 301-796-3400 or 855-543-3784

For emergency use of a speciﬁc investigational drug

Contact the review division for the drug if known, or the DDI if not known

If the DDI or review division are unknown or unavailable

Contact the CDER Emergency Coordinator of the Counterterrorism and
Emergency Coordination Staff
Phone: 310-796-9900 or 301-796-2210

E-mail: druginfo@fda.hhs.gov

Fax: 310-431-6356 (please call coordinator before faxing documents)
E-mail: cdererops@fda.hhs.gov
After hours on weekdays, or all day on weekends

Ofﬁce of Crisis Management and Emergency Operations Center
Phone: 866-300-4374 or 301-796-8240

*Contact numbers are current as of March 4, 2016. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm126491.htm.
CDER ¼ Center for Drug Evaluation and Research; DDI ¼ Division of Drug Information; other abbreviations as in Table 3.

173

174

Van Norman

JACC: BASIC TO TRANSLATIONAL SCIENCE VOL. 1, NO. 3, 2016
APRIL 2016:170–9

Drugs, Devices, and the FDA

T A B L E 5 EIND Timeline and Investigator Required Actions

Time

Action

Day 0 to 1

Contact supplier of the investigational drug to obtain their agreement to provide the drug for
emergency use. Obtain a letter of authorization from the supplier granting the right of reference to
information contained in the supplier’s existing IND application. This must be sent to the FDA at
the time of EIND application, by day 15.

Day 1

Call the FDA and request to open an EIND application and obtain FDA authorization for investigational
treatment. Fax or e-mail the information on the Physician’s Checklist for Emergency IND
Application. The checklist can be found at: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/Development
ApprovalProcess/HowDrugsareDevelopedandApproved/ApprovalApplications/InvestigationalNew
DrugINDApplication/UCM343041.pdf
Once the EIND is in effect, the manufacturer may ship the investigational drug directly to the physician
Obtain informed consent from the patient or legally authorized representative prior to treatment and
treat the patient. Send informed consent form to the FDA at the time of EIND application by
day 15.

Post-treatment, no later than day 5

Notify the institutional review board of the emergency treatment. Submit documentation as required
to the local institutional review board.

No later than day 5

Submit full EIND application to the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research at the FDA. The
application includes: IND application cover letter; completed FDA forms; letter of authorization
from the supplier for the right of reference to information in the existing IND application; clinical
protocol for the emergency treatment, including rationale, description of the patient’s condition,
method of administration, description of clinical monitoring, laboratory testing, and procedures to
minimize risk and evaluate effects of treatment; copy of the informed consent; and (optional) copy
of the investigator’s brochure.

As soon as possible, but no later than 7 days after occurrence

Mandatory report of life-threatening or fatal occurrences.

As soon as possible, but no later than 15 days after occurrence

Report serious or unexpected suspected adverse reactions.

Any time during the IND application life

Submit amendments to the EIND applications if there are any changes to information sent with the
initial EIND application.

Following completion of EIND treatment

Send FDA written summary of the results of the investigational treatment.

After 1 year (if EIND application is still active) and within 60 days
of the anniversary of the FDA’s authorization date

Send EIND application annual report to the appropriate review division of Center for Drug Evaluation
and Research.

EIND ¼ emergency investigational new drug; other abbreviations as in Table 3.

(15,30). Drug development is lengthy and expensive,

clinical effect (32,33) and administration schedules

and many drugs fail very late in the process after

not expected to produce any clinical toxicity. Dura-

expenditure of signiﬁcant time and resources. As new

tion of dosing in any patient is anticipated to be <1

agents increasingly are molecularly targeted, it seems

week (34).

rational to perform early testing to assess such agents

A Phase 0 trial can help determine whether a drug

early in the pharmacodynamic assay. Such trials,

engages its expected target and is likely to have the

termed “Phase 0,” or “exploratory” trials, were ﬁrst

anticipated clinical effect in human subjects (33). It

allowed in 2006 as a means of facilitating the drug

can also illuminate the pharmacokinetic and phar-

approval (and elimination) process (30). Phase 0 clin-

macodynamic characteristics of the drug. These trials

ical trials require submission of an exploratory IND

may weed out ineffective therapies early in the FDA

followed by a full IND.

process and help the researcher choose between

Phase 0 trials represent the earliest, ﬁrst-in-man

competing

analogue

agents

for

further

clinical

use of a proposed drug therapy (31). They are car-

development. Approval for a Phase 0 trial generally

ried out in very small cohorts (10 to 15 patients), with

requires less toxicity testing than for full Phase I tri-

dose levels <1% of the dose calculated to produce a

als. Phase 0 trials can also be conducted while
awaiting FDA review of a standard IND application,

T A B L E 6 Safety, Efﬁcacy, and Effectiveness

Safety determines the highest tolerable dose or optimal dose needed
to achieve the desired clinical beneﬁt and potential adverse effects
in that exposure range.
Efﬁcacy determines whether a drug has a positive clinical beneﬁt over
placebo or other intervention. Efﬁcacy tests involve “ideal,” that is,
strictly controlled conditions.
Effectiveness describes a drug’s clinical beneﬁts in a “real world”
situation, for example, where patients may have comorbid
conditions or other medications that interact with the drug, and
where drug administration may not following strict study
guidelines.

thus providing valuable information regarding human effects while avoiding delays in the full FDA
approval process.
P h a s e I t r i a l s . The exploratory (Phase 0) INDs are
actually a subset of Phase I human subject trials of all
new drugs. Exploratory INDs progress to “full” Phase
I clinical trials if early results are promising. The
purposes of a Phase I trial are to provide initial
safety evaluation, determine safe dosing ranges, and
identify common side effects and the toxicity proﬁle

Van Norman

JACC: BASIC TO TRANSLATIONAL SCIENCE VOL. 1, NO. 3, 2016
APRIL 2016:170–9

175

Drugs, Devices, and the FDA

T A B L E 7 Characteristics of Clinical Trial Phases

Phase 0
“Exploratory”

Phase I

Phase II

Description

First-in-man early trial to
determine if drug
engages its expected
target

Initial safety evaluations,
determine safe
dosage range, identify
common side effects,
study toxicity proﬁle
of the drug

Begin to explore efﬁcacy
while maintaining
safety

Final conﬁrmation of
safety and efﬁcacy

Phase III

Any trials conducted after
FDA approval of the
drug

Phase IV

Number of
subjects

10–15 healthy volunteers

20–80 healthy
volunteers

100–300 volunteers with
the targeted medical
condition

1,000–3,000 subjects
with the targeted
medical condition

Number of subjects
depends on trial
endpoints

Dose

Single, low dose (<1% of
dose calculated to
produce a clinical
effect)

 Single dose
 Single ascending
dose
 Multiple ascending
dose

Multiple dose trials, often
conducted against
placebo

Multiple dose trials,
ascending doses

Variable

Endpoints

Not expected to show
clinical effect or
signiﬁcant adverse
effects. Helps to
choose between
competing chemical
analogs for further
study.

Escalation of dose ends
when unacceptable
side effects occur; the
previous dose is
considered the
maximum tolerated
dose.

Explores clinical effects
against the targeted
condition, and reveals
the less-common side
effects

Conﬁrms clinical efﬁcacy
of the drug against
the targeted condition
and evaluates safety
and side effects

Conﬁrms clinical efﬁcacy
and safety and explores
other possible drug
uses; may be required as
a condition of drug
approval

Timing

Can be conducted with
prior approval while
ﬁnal IND review is
pending

Together with Phase 0
trials, ﬁrst clinical
trials conducted in an
IND process

Conducted after report to
FDA of results of
Phase I trials

Conducted after report to
FDA of results of
Phase II trials

Conducted after release of
the drug by the FDA
for marketing

Abbreviations as in Table 3.

T A B L E 8 Major Steps in the Clinical Trials Phase and Review for INDs

Review information from the FDA regarding clinical trials and
guidance documents relevant to the drug being investigated

 http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/ResourcesForYou/Consumers/ucm143534.
htm
 http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/How
DrugsareDevelopedandApproved/ApprovalApplications/NewDrug
ApplicationNDA/default.htm
 http://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm122046.
htm

Investigator contacts the review section at the FDA

http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/
HowDrugsareDevelopedandApproved/ApprovalApplications/
InvestigationalNewDrugINDApplication/Overview/UCM166356.pdf

IND application submitted
30-day review

 If no objection from FDA, clinical trials proceed
 If suggestions made by FDA reviewer, a consultation with a reviewer
should occur before proceeding
 If mandatory changes are determined, trials cannot proceed until the
changes are made

Phase 0 clinical trial

Proceed during ﬁnalization of full IND

Phase I clinical trial

Small study to determine toxicity and safety

Report submitted to FDA after Phase I

FDA and sponsors discuss how Phase II studies will be conducted

Phase II clinical trial

Moderate-size study to explore efﬁcacy and less-common side effects

Report submitted to FDA

FDA and sponsors discuss how large-scale Phase III studies will be
conducted

Phase III clinical trial

Large prospective studies of clinical efﬁcacy

Pre-NDA period

Sponsor meets with the FDA

Submission of NDA

NDA asks the FDA for marketing approval of the drug

60-day waiting period

FDA has 60 days to determine if they will ﬁle the application and start the
review process

FDA review team assigned to the drug

 FDA reviews information that goes into a drug’s professional labeling
 FDA inspects facilities where the drug will be manufactured

FDA approval

Drug is approved for marketing OR response letter from FDA outlining
further actions

NDA ¼ new drug application; other abbreviations as in Table 3.

176

Van Norman

JACC: BASIC TO TRANSLATIONAL SCIENCE VOL. 1, NO. 3, 2016
APRIL 2016:170–9

Drugs, Devices, and the FDA

of the drug. The number of subjects is still low, usu-

any changes in drug manufacture or preparation

ally between 20 and 80 (35), and subjects are gener-

anticipated for Phase II studies.

ally healthy because clinical effectiveness is not an
endpoint of the trial.

The goals of Phase II trials are to explore the efﬁcacy of the drug while continuing to establish safety.

Single-dose studies are the usual starting place of

These trials are larger (100 to 300 subjects), so that

Phase I trials: the subject is given a single dose of

less-common side effects can be seen, and the trials

drug no greater than one-tenth the highest dose

involve patients who have a condition that is a ther-

associated with no adverse effects in the most sen-

apeutic target of the drug (35). Tests are often con-

sitive animal safety studies (34). Many researchers

ducted in comparison to placebo. Escalating dosing

now believe that single-dose toxicity trials should not

may be incorporated, exploring the therapeutic range

be carried out simultaneously in multiple subjects—

of the drug.

meaning that the drug should be tested in a single

P h a s e I I I c l i n i c a l t r i a l s . Prior to initiating Phase III

subject and enough time be allowed between subjects

trials, the investigator or sponsor must again submit

such that a severe reaction in any subject will lead to

updated information to the FDA regarding continuing

termination of the study before other subjects are

safety for subjects, incorporating any safety and

exposed (25,36). A recent, disastrous clinical trial

toxicity information gained in Phase II testing. Phase

serves to underscore this concern; in the initial Phase

III trials are the ﬁnal conﬁrmation of safety and efﬁ-

I trial of TGN1412, an immunomodulatory drug to

cacy, and are carried out in large cohorts (1,000 to

treat leukemia and autoimmune diseases, all 6 sub-

3,000 subjects). The trials evaluate effectiveness,

jects were dosed on the same day successively. Every

monitor side effects, and compare the drug with

single subject experienced unexpected, agonizing,

commonly used alternative treatments.

and immediate life-threatening complications. Had

Following successful completion of Phase III clin-

dosing of participants been spread out over several

ical trials, the drug sponsor can ﬁle a New Drug

days, reaction of the ﬁrst subject likely would have

Application (NDA) with the CDER of the FDA. This

led to termination of the trial prior to other partici-

application constitutes a request by the sponsor to

pant exposures (37).

manufacture and sell the drug in the United States.

Single-dose trials are followed by single and multiple ascending-dose trials (Phase Ia and Ib trials,

THE NDA. The NDA (38) includes all data concerning

respectively). In single ascending-dose (Phase Ia)

the drug; all information about the manufacturing

trials, a small group of subjects (typically 3) are all

process and facilities, quality control, and assurance;

given a single, higher dose. If no adverse effects are

a complete product description (chemical formula,

noted, another small set of subjects receives a further

speciﬁcations, pharmacodynamics, and pharmacoki-

escalated dose, and this process continues until

netics); indications; labeling; and proposed risk

either pre-calculated pharmacokinetic safety levels

evaluation and mitigation processes if applicable. A

are reached or until adverse effects begin appearing.

typical NDA can run 100,000 pages, and according to

If at a given dosing level any subject experiences an

the Ofﬁce of the Federal Register, the application fee

unacceptable side effect, then additional subjects

in 2016 for an NDA that requires clinical data is

(e.g., 3 more) are dosed to conﬁrm. When unaccept-

$2,374,200 (39,40). The FDA has 60 days to deter-

able side effects appear, the drug is determined to

mine if they will ﬁle the application once it is

have reached its maximum tolerated dose, generally

received (41).

described as the dose preceding the one with the
intolerable adverse effects.

FDA reviewers will evaluate clinical data, analyze
drug samples, inspect the production facilities, and

Multiple ascending-dose (Phase Ib) studies eval-

check proposed labeling. The Federal Food, Drug, and

uate the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of

Cosmetics Act requires that there be “substantial

multiple doses of the drug. Groups of patients receive

evidence” of drug safety and efﬁcacy (42). The FDA

multiple low doses of the drug, and biological sam-

interprets this as needing at least 2 adequate and well-

ples (blood, ﬂuids, urine) are collected and analyzed.

controlled Phase III trials with convincing evidence of

The dose is then escalated in further groups, to a pre-

effectiveness (29), although this is not a guarantee of

determined level.

approval. The FDA often convenes advisory panels

P h a s e I I c l i n i c a l t r i a l s . Following favorable initial

of experts to review the data, and usually follows

safety testing, the investigator or sponsor submits the

panel

safety information regarding the drug to the FDA,

speciﬁc conditions, such as requirements for post-

incorporating any new information that has been

approval (Phase IV) clinical studies, distribution re-

gained in Phase I testing. The submission includes

strictions, changes to labeling, or other requirements.

recommendations.

Approval

may

include

Van Norman

JACC: BASIC TO TRANSLATIONAL SCIENCE VOL. 1, NO. 3, 2016
APRIL 2016:170–9

Drugs, Devices, and the FDA

F I G U R E 1 Time, Money, and Success: Stages in Drug Development

The highest failure rates occurs in Phase II testing, which is the ﬁrst stage in which doses of drug in humans are escalated to reach levels
expected to be clinically active (i.e., the ﬁrst doses at which efﬁcacy may fail and less common side effects appear). Cumulative probability of a
drug reaching U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval declines with each stage. The overall probability of a drug passing all stages is
approximately 11% as of 2014 (12).

FDA review occurs within 180 days of receipt of a

approval of the NDA is denied, the FDA sends

complete application (38). An accelerated process is

a complete response letter describing speciﬁc de-

available for generic drugs, products that provide

ﬁciencies and recommending ways for the applicant

“meaningful therapeutic beneﬁt” over existing drugs,

to make the application viable. Unsuccessful appli-

those that concern serious or life-threatening condi-

cants may request a hearing.

tions, or those that address a previously unmet

Upon review and approval of the NDA, the manu-

medical need. If the application is found to have de-

facturer is free to manufacture and market the drug. A

ﬁciencies, the clock stops on review while the

summary of the timeline, costs, and overall proba-

manufacturer is given an opportunity to respond to

bility of success for the drug development process can

the deﬁciencies or withdraw the application. If

be found in Figure 1 (12,41).

177

178

Van Norman

JACC: BASIC TO TRANSLATIONAL SCIENCE VOL. 1, NO. 3, 2016
APRIL 2016:170–9

Drugs, Devices, and the FDA

the safety and efﬁcacy of drugs and devices. Thus,

T A B L E 9 Levels of Evidence for a Clinical Therapeutic Study

regulatory processes are under constant scrutiny to

Level I

identify means of streamlining approval processes

 High-quality RCT (e.g., >80% follow-up, double-blinded) with
statistically signiﬁcant different or no statistically signiﬁcant
difference by narrow CIs
 Level 1 RCT or systematic review and results were
homogeneous

while not compromising the primary mission of the
agency.
After approval of an IND application, the FDA allows human Phase 0, I, II, and III studies, provided
safety and efﬁcacy are demonstrated at the appro-

Level II

 Lesser quality RCTs (<80% follow-up, not blinded, poor
randomization)
 Prospective comparison studies
 Systematic review of level II studies or of level I studies with
inconsistent results
Data from DeVries JG, Berlet GC. Understanding levels of evidence for scientiﬁc
communication. Foot Ankle Special 2010;3:205–10.
CI ¼ conﬁdence interval; RCT ¼ randomized controlled trial.

priate clinical testing phase. For NDA, the FDA requires “substantial evidence” of drug safety and
efﬁcacy, and interprets this as needing at least 2
adequate and well-controlled Phase III trials with
convincing evidence of effectiveness (Table 9). Some
approvals may require more studies.
The FDA encourages early and regular communication from investigators and sponsors seeking drug

SUMMARY

approval, with a purpose of avoiding application

The United States has arguably the most stringent

that may waste valuable time, effort, and ﬁnances in

regulations regarding approval of medical drugs and

the process of bringing a drug to market.

failures or required modiﬁcations or clinical holds

devices in the world. The average time from FDA
application to approval of drugs is 12 years, and the

REPRINT REQUESTS AND CORRESPONDENCE: Dr.

estimated average cost of taking a new drug from

Gail A. Van Norman, Anesthesiology and Pain Medi-

concept to market exceeds $1 billion. The FDA faces

cine, University of Washington, 2141 8th Avenue

constant, often contradictory pressure to shorten the

West, Seattle, Washington 98119, USA. E-mail: lbspar-

approval process, while still preserving or enhancing

row@yahoo.com OR gvn@uw.edu.

REFERENCES
1. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. History.

10. Eichler HG, Pgnatti F, Flamion B, Leufkens H,

18. The Dietary Health and Education Act of 1994.

Available at: http://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/
WhatWeDo/History/default.htm. Accessed March
4, 2016.

Breckenridge A. Balancing early market access to
new drugs with the need for beneﬁt; risk data: a
mounting dilemma. Nature Rev Drug Discov 2008;
7:818–26.

19. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Investiga-

2. Gieringer DH. The safety and efﬁcacy of new
drug approval. Cato J 1985;5:177–201.
3. The Wiley Act. Public Law Number 59-384, 34
Stat 768. 59th Cong (1906).
4. Grabowski HG, Vernon JM. The Regulation of
Pharmaceuticals; the 1962 Amendments. Washington DC: American Enterprise Institute, 1983:
29–30.

11. Morgan

S,

Grootendorst

P,

Lexchin

J,

Cunningham C, Greyson D. The cost of drug
development: a systematic review. Health Policy
2011;100:4–17.
12. Dimasi JA, Grabowski GH, Hansen RW. Innovation in the pharmaceutical industry: new
estimates of R&D costs. J Health Econ 2016;47:
20–33.

5. Kennedy D. A calm look at the drug lag. JAMA
1987;230:423–6.

13. Arrowsmith J. Trial watch: Phase II and submission failures 2007–2010. Nature Rev Drug

6. Daemmrich A. Invisible monuments and the
costs of pharmaceutical regulation: twenty-ﬁve
years of drug lag debate. Pharm Hist 2003;45:
3–17.

Discov 2011;10:87.

7. Vogel D. AIDs and the politics of drug lag.

15. Arrowsmith H, Miller P. Trial watch: Phase II

Public Int 1989;96:73–85.

and Phase III attrition rates 2011–2012. Nature Rev
Drug Discov 2013;12:569.

8. Taggart HM, Alderdice JM. Fatal cholestatic
jaundice in elderly patients taking benoxaprofen.
Br Med J 1982;284:1372.

14. Arrowsmith J. Trial watch: Phase II failures
2008–2010. Nature Rev Drug Discov 2011;10:
328–9.

16. Fargen KM, Frei D, Fiorella D, et al. The FDA
approval
process
for
medical
J Neurointervent Surg 2013;5:269–75.

devices.

S.784. 103rd Cong (1992–1994).

tional new drug (IND) application. Available at: http://
www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/
HowDrugsareDevelopedandApproved/Approval
Applications/InvestigationalNewDrugINDApplication/
default.htm#Introduction. Accessed March 4, 2016.
20. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Pre-IND
consultation program. Available at: http://www.
fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/
HowDrugsareDevelopedandApproved/Approval
Applications/InvestigationalNewDrugINDApplication/
Overview/default.htm. Accessed March 4, 2016.
21. U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
Pre-IND consultation contacts. Available at:
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/Development
ApprovalProcess/HowDrugsareDevelopedand
Approved/ApprovalApplications/Investigational
NewDrugINDApplication/Overview/UCM166356.pdf.
Accessed March 4, 2016.
22. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance
documents for drug applications. Available at: http://
www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/
ucm090361.htm. Accessed March 4, 2016.

9. Lueck TJ. At Lilly, the side-effects of Oraﬂex.
The New York Times Aug 15, 1982. Available at:
www.nytimes.com/1982/08/15/business/at-lillythe-side-effects-of-oraﬂex.html. Accessed March

17. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Dietary
supplements. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/
Food/DietarySupplements/default.htm. Accessed

23. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance
for industry: content and format of investigational
new drug applications (INDs) for Phase 1

4, 2016.

March 4, 2016.

studies of drugs, including well-characterized,

Van Norman

JACC: BASIC TO TRANSLATIONAL SCIENCE VOL. 1, NO. 3, 2016
APRIL 2016:170–9

Drugs, Devices, and the FDA

therapeutic, biotechnology-derived products.
Available at: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/
Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/
Guidances/UCM074980.pdf. Accessed March 4,

29. Thaul S. How FDA approves drugs and regulates their safety and effectiveness. CRS report for
congress. Congressional Research Service. July 25,
2012. Available at: http://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/

2016.

R41983.pdf. Accessed March 4, 2016.

24. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Manual of
policies and procedures; Center for Drug Evaluation
and Research: review management. IND process and
review procedures (including clinical holds). Available
at: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/AboutFDA/Centers
Ofﬁces/OfﬁceofMedicalProductsandTobacco/CDER/

30. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for
industry, investigators, and reviewers. Exploratory IND
studies. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/
Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/
Guidances/UCM078933.pdf. Accessed March 4, 2016.

ManualofPoliciesProcedures/UCM082022.pdf. Accessed
March 4, 2016.

31. Rubenstein LV, Steinberg SM, Kummar S, et al.
The statistics of phase 0 trials. Statistics Med
2010;29:1072–6.

25. Friedhoff LT. Initial human testing: the IND
application and Phase I testing. In: New Drugs:
An Insider’s Guide to the FDA’s New Drug
Approval Process for Scientists, Investors and
Patients. New York NY: Pharmaceutical Special
Projects Group LLC (PSPG) Publishing, 2009:

32. Jacobsen-Kram J. Improving the quality of
cancer clinical trials. Ofﬁce of New Drugs, Center
for Drug Evaluation and Research, Food and
Drug Administration. Available at: http://iom.
nationalacademies.org/w/media/Files/Activity%
20Files/Disease/NCPF/OverviewoftheExploratory

41–51.

INDDifferencesfromtheTraditionalINDJacobson
Kram.pdf. Accessed March 4, 2016.

26. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Emergency use of an investigational drug or biologic—
information sheet. Available at: http://www.fda.
gov/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm1264
91.htm. Accessed March 4, 2016.
27. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Final rules
for expanded access to investigational drugs for
treatment use and charging for investigational
drugs. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/
DevelopmentApprovalProcess/HowDrugsare
DevelopedandApproved/ApprovalApplications/
InvestigationalNewDrugINDApplication/ucm172492.
htm. Accessed March 4, 2016.

33. Kummar S, Rubinstein L, Kinders R, et al. Phase
0 clinical trials: conceptions and misconceptions.
Cancer J 2008;14:133–7.
34. Guidance for industry, investigators, and reviewers; exploratory IND studies US DHHS, Division
of Drug Information, Center for Drug evaluation and
Research, Food and Drug Administration. January
2006.
Available
at:
http://www.fda.gov/
downloads/drugs/guidancecomplianceregulatory
information/guidances/ucm078933.pdf. Accessed
March 15, 2016.

28. The Food and Drug Administration Moderni-

35. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. CFR—Code
of Federal Regulations Title 21. Chapter I, Sec 312.

zation Act of 1997. H.R. 1411. 105th Congress
(April 23, 1997).

21, phases of an investigation. Available at: http://
www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/

cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?fr¼312.21.
March 4, 2016.

Accessed

36. Goodyear M. Learning from the TGN1412 trial.
BMJ 2006;332:677.
37. Attarwala H. TGN1412: from discovery to
disaster. J Young Pharm 2010;2:332–6.
38. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. New Drug
Application (NDA). Available at: http://www.
fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/
HowDrugsareDevelopedandApproved/Approval
Applications/NewDrugApplicationNDA/default.
htm. Accessed March 4, 2016.
39. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Prescription Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA). Available at:
http://www.fda.gov/ForIndustry/UserFees/Prescription
DrugUserFee/default.htm. Accessed March 4, 2016.
40. Department of Health and Human Services,
Federal Food and Drug Administration. prescription drug user fee rates for ﬁscal year 2016: a
notice by the Food and Drug Administration
on 08/03/2015. Available at: https://www.
federalregister.gov/articles/2015/08/03/201518914/prescription-drug-user-fee-rates-for-ﬁscalyear-2016#h-11. Accessed March 4, 2016.
41. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA’s drug
review process: continued. Drug review steps
simpliﬁed. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/
Drugs/ResourcesForYou/Consumers/ucm289601.
htm. Accessed March 4, 2016.
42. Federal Food Drug and Cosmetics Act. P.L.
75-717, x505(c) and (d). 75th Cong (1938).

KEY WORDS drug approval, FDA,
investigational new drug

179

